Hi, I'd like to dive straight into this discussion
on privacy first machine learning for web applications,
by outlining why I feel machine learning for the web
is an essential feature.
Slide two.
slide-2
Accessibility is part of a wider effort
to make applications more inclusive.
By inclusively taking into account
the various diverse individuals
using our software and hardware
and making sure there are equal
and fair access without barriers.
It's inclusive as it takes in both short term
and long term accessibility concerns,
but when we look into these aspects,
we're often looking at physical considerations only,
such as visual or limb impairments.
Although considerations outside the physical
are often ignored when we're examining inclusivity,
and this can sometimes mean individuals
with diverse backgrounds
are left behind when we build software.
Slide three.
slide-3
Take an application that is large and slow to load,
we'll build it, we can consider the market demographics
which devices, operating systems and browsers to support.
Well, this is at its most fundamental financially driven.
Of course, there's always a cost and overturn attributes
to most development efforts,
even if the cost is measured in time rather than money.
With the web we have a partial solution to this issue
with progressive enhancement.
We can deliver content easily, and we have been for decades,
enabling delivery of most web applications
without it being necessary to bundle heavy assets.
Those assets are often enhancements to a product
but not essential.
Slide four.
slide-4
We can mitigate issues with underpowered hardware
and underdelivered infrastructure
by focusing on content delivery first
and content enhancements second.
Although we can look at simple metrics like bandwidth,
latency and feature availability,
which typically is indicative of a browser version,
we should be understanding the human side of this,
typically smaller bandwidth, larger latency
and older browsers support is indicative of less wealth.
So by excluding those demographics
to reduce development costs no matter how small the market,
you're excluding poor individuals from your content.
Slide five.
slide-5
This is directly against web accessibility initiative's
goals and accessibility, usability and inclusion.
The web is designed with accessibility in mind
with varying degrees of success.
Slide six.
slide-6
So this is where mobile applications differ.
Consumer electronics have a premium
and an inherent exclusivity,
sure they have great support for accessibility features,
but they lack some of the core benefits of the web,
they're typically not great at backwards compatibility,
whereas web development is considered
of not breaking experiences as standards evolve.
If we want to deliver on a lot of old
or less expensive handsets with native code,
we have to support all the APIs,
and in some cases divergent code bases,
which becomes incredibly costly.
Weighing up the cost benefits
of developing to a particular handset
is entirely justifiable to most projects,
and mobile prices reflect this discrepancy
in quality of content.
The solution to this legacy support issue for developers
can often be to go web first:
deliver the content, enhance the content
and then deliver a native app
if it makes sense for specific features or markets.
Of course, I am simplifying a complex discussion here
and so much don't fit into that categorization.
And native apps sometimes come first.
And this is often the case with games for example.
Slide seven.
slide-7
Privacy is often a marketable feature of a product.
Company sell privacy as value added feature all the time.
There's pro versions of apps that are definitively apps
that don't have advertising built in.
And we know advertisements often come with tracking codes.
So for the sake of simplicity,
we can assume ads and trackers are one and the same.
Slide eight.
slide-8
This isn't a criticism of advertisements
that advertisement is slow.
If ads were delivered in an absolutely privacy friendly way,
and user experience wasn't reduced due to increased latency
or broken accessibility features,
then there'd be little to complain about.
When you position privacy as a luxury,
then you're valuing it as a convenience.
This is a naive and privileged view of privacy
and exclusionary at best.
Without going into real cases
where weakened privacy has a lethal or
material impact on lives,
let's realize this view of privacy
is often taken from people in the tech industry
who are privileged enough to earn a decent salary,
and can afford to make a decision
on if and when to give up their data.
By default into the stance that privacy is a commodity
and data is tradable like oil,
we're defaulting our products to be exclusive
and favoring privacy as a convenience which costs extra.
This is exploitative in most markets as in many cases,
individuals will opt for a free service
and give up their privacy if given the choice,
and many don't have a choice in the first place.
Slide nine.
slide-9
Let's take a look at how privacy has negatively affected
the user experience on the web for a moment.
Slide 10.
slide-10
With EU increasingly adding privacy protections
into legislation,
web developers have devised annoying modal dialogues
which request numerous opt ins
to enable trackers in a legally friendly way.
Many developers have taken issue with the EU law
and have aggressively argued that
it's only way to deliver web apps to the European market.
Many of the apps featuring these modal dialogues
have nothing to do with advertisements or e-commerce.
Developers are simply defaulting to tracking users
on a first load,
and are reducing the quality of the user experience
of your apps along the way,
due to laziness, not legislation.
Slide 10.
You can't deliver advertisements without tracking.
So if you're monetized by ads,
you don't need to destroy your user experience
along the way.
If you're monetized by data and tracking,
then it's time to rethink your business model.
How will the web look without base monetization,
but no tracking or data gathering, for example?
Essentially it would look the same,
but without the annoying needless modal dialogues.
As developers were to blame, not the EU,
California or the end users,
we as developers need to do better.
Slide 11.
slide-11
So how does this affect machine learning?
This is where mobile apps can only be much better.
We have the capability due to hardware access
to deliver personalization on mobile apps
using machine learning.
Slide 12.
slide-12
We can currently build offline enabled models
with tooling and bundle them with our apps
enabling personalized experiences
by learning about the end user
without sending data anywhere.
We can even add differential privacy
and federation tool models,
features also available in edge devices
and internet of things.
This means we can do clever personalized analytics
without looking at data.
And the worst we would need to do
is send the model weights towards services
for federation before updating the model again.
We're not transferring data here,
we're transferring anonymous weights only.
This means mobile apps can create much better experiences
than web apps when privacy is valued.
In this way the web is far behind
in terms of privacy features.
It doesn't matter what cookie protections, tracking blockers
or anonymization features you attempt to build in,
if you're lazily transferring data to a central resource,
you're probably not privacy enabled.
Take for example, those privacy aware solutions
that hash an individual's email address
@@@ storing it in plain text.
When the information leaks,
there's no personal identifiable information, right?
Well, as most developers use the same hashing algorithms,
there's a good chance you can connect disparate sources
of data together to form a rather solid picture of someone,
hashes are not the finishing line for privacy,
they're hardly the starting line.
Slide 13.
slide-13
Let's segue into looking at most machine learning
infrastructure currently powering
moderately successful web apps for a moment.
Slide 14.
slide-14
Typically these days we're building data warehouses,
data lakes, to support data aggregation, analysis,
model building and deployment.
At various scales,
this architecture is essentially ubiquitous
and has been for some time,
whether you're building one model or a 1000 models.
This architecture is lazy,
most developers will take this blueprint
and continue to implement it are lazy,
it's commercially focused,
it's driven by an @@@ of the data can be collected,
and the models that can be built
with the analytics dashboards that can be provided.
But it's not driven by the end user,
it's not driven by individuals, and it's not driven by humans.
It's also expensive in the long term,
but that's another discussion.
Slide 15.
slide-15
So what does good data science architecture
look like for the web?
Firstly, like apps it should be privacy first.
We shouldn't be vacuuming data
and then attempt to apply anonymization techniques
to that data.
That's like committing a crime
and then bleaching the hotel room.
I swear, if you go in with a UV light,
you'll still find evidence, no matter how hard you worked.
So let's stop trying to fix the data
and fix the architecture instead.
Slide 16.
slide-16
Differential privacy is a great tool if applied correctly,
but it's still not the first feature
we should be looking at.
Decentralization, distribution and federation
are modern approaches to data science architecture.
They provide the best features to the end user,
including protection by default,
and they give just a little more work.
Now, this may be hard for a lot of developers
and data scientists to hear,
but we're meant to be doing that hard work.
That's what programming is,
reducing the complexity of a set of tasks for the end user.
So what does this approach give us?
It enables us to run inferences on edge devices
and in some cases it allows us to run some of the training,
while some infrastructure is there
to give you heavy lifting only.
If we distributed the training workload
we can even reduce data IO
by mitigating the need to centrally store
in some gigantic data lake.
And data lakes have their uses,
but they're often overuses,
when all we really need to know is about events and weights.
Slide 17.
slide-17
Whenever ML operations are first class features
of the modern web browser,
we can add progressive enhancement to our apps
by allowing models to be executed within the browser
using the best available hardware.
Architecturally, our browser becomes our OS device
in this ideal,
and we can also offload some the inference
from the legacy central platform to the end user,
providing them with added privacy, more responsive resources
and more personalized experiences.
We can also reuse the same models
that we've been building in mobile apps.
Slide 18.
slide-18
By bringing browsers in line with native apps
in terms of model inference capabilities,
by optimizing usage of hardware
like central graphics and neural processing units
to process models,
it allows us to build more inclusive solutions,
without which we can't build truly privacy friendly
and machine learning powered apps.
It lowers the cost of entry
from a latest luxury electronic device
to a favorite free browser download,
and this is key to ensuring the web
is a free and safe ecosystem for everyone.
slide-19
Thank you for listening.